It was about 1963 when a noted
philosopher here at MIT named Hubert
Dreyfus
when
Hubert Dreyfus um
wrote a paper
about 1963
in which he um alleged had a subject uh
had a had a had a had a heading titled
"Computers Can't Play Chess."
Of course, he was uh subsequently
invited over to the artificial
intelligence laboratory to play the
machine, and of course, he lost.
Whereupon
Seymour Papert wrote a rebuttal to
Dreyfus's famous paper
and which had a subject heading "Dreyfus
Can't Play Chess, Either."
But in a strange sense, Dreyfus might
have been right and would have been
right if he were to have said
"Computers can't play chess the way
humans play chess, yet."
In any case, uh roundabout 1968, a chess
master
named David Levy uh bet um
noted founder of artificial intelligence
John McCarthy that no computer would
beat the world champion within 10 years.
And 5 years later, McCarthy gave up
because it had already become clear that
no computer would um
win in a way that McCarthy wanted it to
win. That is to say, by playing chess
the way humans play chess.
But then, 20 years after that, in 1997
Deep Blue beat the world champion
and chess suddenly became uninteresting.
But we're going to talk about games
today because um
there are elements of gameplay that do
model some of the things that go on in
our head.
And if they don't model things that go
on in our head, they do model some kind
of intelligence.
And if we're to have a general
understanding of what intelligence is
all about, we have to understand that
kind of intelligence, too.
So, we'll start off by talking about
various ways that we might design a
computer program to play a game like
chess.
And we'll conclude by talking a little
bit about
what uh Deep Blue adds to the
adds to the mix other than tremendous
speed.
So, that's our agenda.
By the end of the um hour, you'll
understand and be able to write your own
Deep Blue if you feel like it.
First, we want to talk about how it
might be possible for
a computer to play chess. Um let's talk
about several approaches that might be
possible.
Approach number one is that the
machine might make a description of the
board, same way a human would.
Talk about pawn structure, king safety,
whether it's a good time to castle, that
sort of thing. So, it would be analysis
and perhaps some strategy
mixed up with some tactics.
And all that would get mixed up
and finally result
in some kind of move.
So, if this is the uh game board
the move, the next thing to do would be
determined by some process like that.
And the trouble is
no one knows how to do it.
And so, in that sense, Dreyfus is right.
None of the game-playing programs today
know how incorporate any of that kind of
stuff.
So, since nobody knows how to do it
knows how to do that, we can't talk
about it. So, we can talk about other
ways though that we might try. For
example, we could have if-then rules.
How would that work? That would work
this way. You you you look at the board
represented by this node here
and you say, "Well, if
the
if it's possible to move the queen pawn
forward by one, then do that."
So, it doesn't do any evaluation of the
board. It doesn't
try anything. It just says, "Let me look
at the board and select a move on that
basis."
So, that would be
uh a way of approaching
game situation like this.
Here's the situation.
Here are the possible moves, and one is
selected on the basis of an if-then rule
like so.
And nobody can make a very strong chess
player that works like that. Curiously
enough, someone has made a pretty good
checkers-playing program that that works
like that.
Checks to see what moves are available
on the board
ranks them
picks the highest one that's available.
But in general, that's not a very good
approach. It's not very powerful. You
couldn't make a
Well, when I say couldn't, means I can't
think of any way that you could make a
strong chess-playing program that way.
So, a third way to do this is to
uh
look
ahead
and evaluate.
And what that means is you look ahead
like so. You you see all the possible
consequences of moves and you say "Which
of these
So, you So, that would be a approach
that comes in here like so and says
"Which one of those three situations is
best?"
And to do that, we have to find have to
have some way of evaluating
uh the situation, deciding which of
those is best.
Now, I want to do a little brief aside
cuz I want to talk about the mechanisms
that are popularly used to do that kind
of evaluation.
In the end, there are lots of features
of the chess board. Let's call them F1
F2 and so on.
And we might form some function of those
features.
And that overall is called the static
value.
So, it's static because you're not
exploring any consequences of what might
happen. You're just looking at the board
as it is, checking the king safety
checking the pawn structure. Each of
those produces a number
feeds into this function, out comes a
value
and that is a value of the board seen
from your perspective.
Now, normally
this function G is reduced to a linear
polynomial.
So, in the end, the most popular kind of
way of forming a static value is to take
F1
multiplied times some constant C1
add C2
multiplied times F2.
And that is a linear
scoring
polynomial.
So, we could use that function to
produce numbers from each of these
things and then pick the highest number,
and that would be a way of playing the
game.
Actually, a scoring polynomial is a
little bit more than we need because all
we really need is a method that looks at
those three boards and says, "I like
this one best."
It doesn't have to rank them. It doesn't
have to give the numbers. All it has to
do is say which one it likes best.
So, one way of doing that is to use a
linear scoring polynomial, but it's not
the only way of doing that.
So, that's uh number two and number
three.
But now, what else might we do?
Well, if we reflect back on some of the
searches we talked about
what's the base case against which
everything else is compared?
What's the way of doing search that
doesn't require any intelligence, just
brute force?
We could use the British Museum
algorithm and simply evaluate the entire
tree of possibilities. I move, you move,
I move, you move all the way down to
all the way down to what?
Maybe 100
50 moves. You would do 50 things, I do
50 things.
So, before we can decide if that's a
good idea or not
uh we probably ought to um
develop some vocabulary.
So, consider
this
tree of moves.
There'll be some number
of choices considered at each level
and there'll be some number of levels.
So, the standard language for this is to
call this the branching factor.
And in this particular case, B is equal
to three.
This is the depth
of the tree, and in this case, D is two.
So, now that produces a a certain number
of terminal or leaf nodes.
How many of the How many of those are
there?
Well, that's pretty simple computation,
right? It's just B to the D.
Right, Christopher? B to the D?
So, if you have
B to the D at this level, you have one.
B to the D at this level, you have B.
B at B to the D at this level, you have
B squared.
So, B to the D
in this particular case
is not.
So, now we can use this vocabulary that
we've developed to talk about whether
it's reasonable to just do the British
Museum algorithm be done with it.
Forget about chess and go home.
Well, let's see. It's about It's It's
pretty It's pretty deep down there.
If we think about chess
and we think about a standard game which
each person does 50 things
that gives a D of about 100.
And if you think about the branching
factor in chess, it's
generally presumed to be depending on
the stage of the game and so on and so
forth. It varies, but it might average
around 14 or 15.
If it were just 10, that would be 10 to
the 100th, right?
But it's a little more than that because
the branching factor is more than 10.
So, in the end, it looks like according
to Claude Shannon
there are about 10
to 100 to the 120th leaf nodes down
there.
And if you're going to do the a British
Museum treatment of this tree, you'd
have to do 10 to the 120th static
evaluations.
Down there at the bottom.
If you're going to see which one of the
moves is best at the top.
So, is that a reasonable number? You
know, it it didn't used to seem
it didn't used to seem practicable.
It used to seem impossible.
But now we've got cloud computing
everything and maybe we could actually
do that.
Right?
What do you think, Manasseh?
Can you do that?
Get enough computers going in the cloud?
You're not
You're not sure?
Should we work it out?
Let's work it out. I'll need I need some
help. Especially from
any of you who are studying cosmology.
So, we'll start with how many atoms are
there in the universe?
Volunteers?
10 to the
No, no, no. 10 to the 38th has been
offered. That's way too way too low.
Last time I looked, it was about 10 to
the 80th
atoms in the universe.
Uh next thing I'd like to know is how
many seconds are there in a year?
It's a good number to have in your, you
know, memorized.
And that number is approximately
uh pi
times 10 to the seventh.
Okay?
So, how many nanoseconds in a second?
That gives us 10 to the ninth.
Uh and at last, how many years are there
in the history of the universe?
What?
Uh she offers something on the order of
10 billion.
Okay. Maybe 14 billion. We'll say 10
billion to make our calculation simple.
So, that's 10 to the 10th years.
So, if we add all that up
80 90 plus 16, that's
10 to the 106
year uh
uh 10 to the 106th
nanoseconds in the history of the
universe multiplied times the number of
atoms in the universe. So, if all of the
atoms in the universe
were doing static evaluations at
nanosecond speeds
since the beginning of the Big Bang
we'd still be 14 orders of magnitude
short.
So, it'd be pretty good cloud. We'd have
to
harness together lots of universes.
So, the British Museum algorithm is not
going to work.
No good.
So, what we're going to have to do is
we're going to have to put some things
together and hope for the best.
So, the fifth way is the way we're
actually going to do it. And what we're
going to do is we're going to
look ahead.
Not just one level, but as far as
possible.
So, uh
we consider
not only the situation that we've
developed it here, but we'll try to push
that out as far as we can and look at
these
look at the static values of the of of
the leaf nodes down here and somehow use
that as a way of playing the game.
So, that is number
five. And number four is going all the
way down there. And this in the end
is all that we can do.
This idea is um
multiply invented
most notably by Claude Shannon
and
also by Alan Turing
who I found out from a friend of mine
uh spent a lot of lunchtime
conversations they spent a lot of
lunchtime conversations talking with
each other about how a computer might
play chess
in against the future when they work
would be computers.
So, Donald Michie and
Alan Turing also invented this over
lunch while they were taking uh some
time off from breaking the from cracking
the German codes.
Well, what is the method?
I I want to illustrate the method with
the simplest possible tree. So, we're
going to have a branching factor of two,
not 14, and we're going to have depth of
two, not something highly
highly serious.
So, here's the game tree.
And there are going to be some numbers
down here at the bottom.
And these are going to be the value of
the board from the perspective of the
player at the top.
And let us say that the player at the
top would like to drive the play as much
as possible toward the big numbers.
So, we're going to call that player the
maximizing player.
He would like to get over here to the
eight
because that's the biggest number.
There's another player, his opponent,
which we'll call the minimizing player.
And he's hoping that the number that the
play will go down to the board situation
that is small as possible because his
view is the opposite of the maximizing
player.
All right? Hence the name minimax.
But how does it work? Do you Do you Do
you see which way the play is going to
go?
How would you decide which way the play
is going to go?
Well, it's not obvious at a glance.
Do you see which way it's going to go?
It's not obvious at a glance. But if we
do more than a glance, if we
look at the situation from the
perspective of the minimizing player
here at the middle level, it's pretty
clear that if the minimizing player
finds himself in that situation
he's going to choose to go that way.
And so, the value of
this situation
from the perspective of the minimizing
player
is two.
He'd never go over there to the seven.
Similarly, if the minimizing player is
over here
with a choice between going toward a one
or toward an eight, he'll obviously go
toward a one.
And so, the value of that
board situation from the perspective of
the minimizing player is one.
So, now we've taken the scores down here
at the bottom of the tree and we back
them up one level.
And you see how we we can just keep
doing this?
Now, the maximizing player can see that
if he goes to the left
he gets a score of two. If he goes to
the right, he only gets a score of one.
So, he's going to go to the left.
And so, overall then, the maximizing
player is going to have
a two
as the perceived value of that situation
there at the top.
So, that's the minimax algorithm. It's
very simple.
You go down to the bottom of the tree.
You compute static values.
You back them up level by level.
And then you decide where to go.
And in this particular situation
the maximizer goes to the left and the
minimizer goes to the left, too. So, the
play ends up here.
Far short of the eight
that the maximizer wanted and less than
the one that the minimizer wanted. But
this is an adversarial game. You're
competing with each other. So, you don't
expect to get what you want.
All right?
So, maybe we see if we can make that
work.
There's a game tree. Do you see how it
goes?
Let's uh Let's see if the system can
figure it out.
So, there it goes crawling its way
through the tree.
This is a branching factor of two, just
like our sample, but now four levels.
You can see that it's got quite a lot of
work to do. It's uh two to the
two to the what? Two to the fourth,
that's
1 2 3 4
two to the fourth
16 static evaluations to do.
So, it found the answer, but it's a lot
of work. We could get a new tree
and restart it. Maybe speed it up.
That goes down that way.
Get a new tree.
Those are just random numbers, so each
time it's going to find a different path
through the tree
according to the numbers that it's
generated.
Now, 16 isn't bad, but if you get down
there around uh 10 levels deep and your
branching factor is 14, well, we know
those numbers get pretty awful, pretty
bad because the number of static
evaluations do down there at the bottom
goes as B to the D.
That's exponential.
And time has shown
that if you get down about seven or
eight levels, you're a jerk.
And if you get down about 15 or 16
levels, you beat the world champion.
So, you'd like to get as far down in the
tree as possible because
when you get as far down to the into the
tree as possible, what happens is that
these crude measures
of board quality
begin to clarify.
And in fact, when you get far enough,
the only thing that really counts is
piece count.
One of those features.
So, if you get far enough
piece count, a few other things will
give you a pretty good idea of what to
do if you get far enough.
But getting far enough can be a problem.
So, we want to do everything we can to
get as far as possible.
We want to pull out every trick we can
find to get as far as possible.
Now, you remember when we talked about
branch and bound
we knew that there were some things we
could do that would cut off whole
portions of the search tree.
And so, what I would like to do is find
something analogous to this world of
games that will cut off whole portions
of the search tree, so we don't have to
look at those static
So, what I want to do is I want to come
back and redo this thing.
But this time I'm going to compute the
static values one at a time.
I've got the same structure in the tree.
And just as before, I'm going to assume
that the top player wants to go toward
the maximum values and the next player
wants to go toward the minimum values,
but none of the static values have been
computed yet.
So, I better start computing them.
That's the first one I find, two.
Now, as soon as I see that two, as soon
as the minimizer sees that two, the
minimizer knows that the value of this
node can't be any greater than two cuz
it'll always choose to go down this way
if this branch produces a bigger number.
So, we can say that the minimizer is
assured already
that the score there will be less than
two, equal to or less than two.
So, now we go over and compute the next
number.
There's a seven.
Now, he knows it's exactly equal to cuz
he'll never go down toward the seven.
As soon as the minimizer says equal to
two, the maximizer says, "Okay,
I can do equal to or greater than two."
All right?
One.
Minimizer says equal to or less than
one.
Now, what?
Compare those two two numbers.
The maximizer knows
if he goes down here, he can't do better
than one.
And he already knows if he goes over
here
he can get a two.
So, it's as if
this branch doesn't even exist.
Cuz this
the maximizer would never choose to go
down there.
And so, you have to see that cuz this is
the important essence of the notion
of alpha beta of the alpha beta
algorithm which is a layering on top of
minimax that cuts off large sections of
the search tree.
So, one more time.
We've developed the situation, so we
know that the maximizer
gets a two going down to the left
and he sees that if he goes down to the
right he can't do better than one.
So, he says to himself
it's as if that branch doesn't exist
and the overall score is two.
And it doesn't matter what that static
value is.
It can be eight as it was.
It can be plus a thousand.
It doesn't matter. It can be minus a
thousand.
Or it could be plus infinity.
Or minus infinity. It doesn't matter
because the maximizer
will always go the other way.
So, that's the alpha beta algorithm.
Can you guess why it's called the alpha
beta algorithm?
Well, because in the algorithm there are
two parameters, alpha and beta.
So, it's important to understand alpha
beta is not an alternative to minimax.
It's minimax with a flourish.
It's something layered on top.
Like we layered things on top of branch
and bound to make it more efficient.
We layer stuff on top of minimax to make
it more efficient.
And you say to me, "Well, that's pretty
easy example and it is. So, let's try a
little bit more complex one.
This just to see if I could do it
without screwing up.
All right?
I The reason I do it I The reason I do
one this complex is not just to show how
tough I am in front of a large audience,
but rather there are certain points of
interest that only occur in a tree of
depth four or greater.
That's the reason for this example.
But work with me and let's see if we can
get our
work our way through it.
What I'm going to do is I'll um
I'll circle the static the numbers that
we actually have to compute.
So, we actually have to compute eight.
And as soon as we do that, the minimizer
knows that that node is going to have a
score of equal to or less than eight
without looking at anything else.
Then he looks at seven.
So, that's equal to seven cuz the
minimizer will clearly go to the right.
As soon as that is determined, then the
maximizer knows that the score here is
equal to or greater than eight.
Now, we evaluate the three.
The minimizer knows equal to or less
than three.
Oh, sorry.
Minimizer seven, yeah.
Okay. Now, what happens?
Well, let's see. The maximizer gets a
seven going that way. He can't do better
than three going that way. So, we got
another one of these cutoff situations.
It's as if this branch doesn't even
exist.
So, this static evaluation need not be
made.
And now we know that that's not not not
merely equal to or greater than seven,
but exactly equal to seven and we can
push that number back up.
So, that becomes equal to or less than
seven.
Okay, you with me so far?
Let's get over on the other side of the
tree as quickly as possible.
So, there's a nine, equal to or less
than nine.
Eight.
Equal to eight. Push the eight up.
Equal to or greater than
eight.
The minimizer can go down this way and
get a seven, will certainly never go
that way
where the maximizer can get an eight.
So, once again, we've got a cutoff.
And it's as if this branch didn't exist.
And that means that these static
evaluations don't have to be made.
And this value is now exactly seven.
But there's a little There's one more
thing to note here, and that is that not
only do we not have to make these static
evaluations down here,
but we don't even have to generate these
moves.
So, we save two ways, both on static
evaluation and on move generation.
So, this this is a real winner, this
alpha beta thing, because it saves an
enormous amount of computation.
Well, we're on the way now. The
maximizer up here is guaranteed equal to
or greater than seven. Has anybody found
the winning move yet?
Is it to the left?
I don't know. We better keep going
because
we don't want to trust any oracles.
So, let's see. There's a one. We've
calculated that. The minimizer can be
guaranteed equal to or less than one at
that particular point.
And I'll think about that for a while.
At the top the maximizer knows he can go
left
and get a seven.
The minimizer, if the play ever gets
here
can ensure
that he's going to drive the situation
to a board number that's one.
So, the question is would the maximizer
ever permit that to happen?
And the answer is surely not.
So, over here in the development of this
side of the tree, we're always com-
comparing numbers at adjacent levels in
the tree.
But here's a situation where we're
comparing numbers that are separated
from each other in the tree, and we
still concluded that no further
examination of this node makes any sense
at all.
This is called deep cutoff.
And that means that this whole branch
here
might as well not exist.
And we won't have to compute that static
value.
All right?
So, it looks I mean, you
you you have this stare of disbelief,
which is perfectly normal. I have to
reconvince myself every time that this
actually works.
But when you think your way through it,
it is clear
that these computations that I've X'd
out don't have to be made.
So, let's carry on and see if we can
complete this, equal to or less than
eight.
Equal to eight.
Equal to eight because the other branch
doesn't even exist. Equal to or less
than
eight.
And we compare these two numbers do we
keep going?
Yes, we keep going cuz maybe the
maximizer can go to the right and
actually hit that eight.
So we have to go over here and keep
working away. There's a nine equal to or
less than nine. Another nine equal to
nine. Push that number up equal to or
greater than
nine.
Let's see minimizer gets an eight going
this way.
Maximizer is ensured of getting a nine
going that way. So once again we've got
a cut off situation. It's as if this
doesn't exist.
Those static evaluations are not made.
This move generation is not made
and computation is saved.
All right.
So let's see if we can
do better on this very example
by using this alpha beta idea.
I'll slow it down a little bit.
We'll change the search type to minimax
with alpha beta.
We see two numbers on each of those
nodes now. Guess what they're called? We
already know, right? They're alpha and
beta. So what's going to happen as the
algorithm proceeds through the tree is
that those numbers are going to to
shrink wrap themselves around the
situation.
So we'll start that up.
So two static evaluations were not made.
Let's try a new tree.
Yet two is still again two different
ones not made. Let's see if what happens
when we use the
classroom example the one I did up
there. Let's make sure they didn't screw
it up.
Slow that down to one.
Few.
Same answer.
So you probably didn't realize it at the
start. Who could? But in fact the play
goes down that way
over this way down that way
and ultimately to the eight
which is not the biggest number and it's
not the smallest number. It's the
compromise number that's arrived at in
virtue of the fact that this is an
adversarial situation.
So you say to me how much
how much energy how much work do you
actually save by doing this?
Well,
It
is the case that in the optimal
situation if everything is ordered
right.
If God has come down and arranged your
tree in just the right way,
then the approximate amount of work you
need to do
the approximate number of static
evaluations performed is approximately
equal to two
times
B
to the D over two.
We don't care about this two. We care a
whole lot about that two.
So that's the amount of work that's
done.
It's B
to the D over two instead of B to the D.
What's that mean? Suppose that without
this idea I can go down seven levels.
How far can I go down with this idea?
14 levels.
So it's the difference between a jerk
and a world champion.
So that however is only in the optimal
case when God has arranged things just
right.
But in practical situations practical
game situations it appears to be the
case experimentally
that the actual number is close to this
approximation for optimal arrangements.
So you would never not want to use alpha
beta.
Saves an amazing amount of time.
You can look at it another way.
Suppose you suppose you go down to the
same number of levels.
How much less work do you have to do?
Well, quite a bit. The square root this
month, right?
It's another way of looking at how it
works.
So we could go home at this point except
for
one problem and that is that we
pretended that the branching factor is
always the same.
But in fact the branching factor will
vary with the
the game state and it will vary with the
game.
So you can calculate how much computing
you can do in two minutes or how much
however much time you have for an
average move
and then you can say how how deep can I
go
and you won't know for sure because it
depends on the game.
So in the early days of game playing
programs
the game playing program left a lot of
computation on the table because it
would make a
a decision in three seconds
and it might have made a much different
move if it used all the computation it
had available.
Alternatively it might be grinding away
and after two minutes was consumed it
had no move
and
just did something random.
So that's not that's not very good.
But that's what early game playing
programs did because no one knew how
deep they could go.
So let's have a look at the situation
here
and say well,
here's a game tree.
It's a binary game tree. That's level
zero.
That's level one.
This is level D minus one
and this is level D.
So down here
you have situation looks like this and
I've left all the game tree out in
between.
So how many leaf nodes are there down
here?
B to the D, right? Oh, I'm going to
forget about alpha beta for a moment.
As as as we did when we looked at some
of those optimal searches we're going to
add these things one one at a time.
So forget about alpha beta. Assume we're
just doing straight minimax.
In that case we would have to calculate
all these static values down here at the
bottom and there are B
to the D of those.
How many are there at this next level
up?
Well, that must be B
to the D minus one.
How many fewer nodes are there at the
second to the last the penultimate level
relative to the final level?
Well, one over B, right?
So if I'm concerned about not getting
all the way through
these calculations at the D level
I can give myself an insurance policy
by calculating out what the answer would
be if I only went down to the D minus D
minus oneth level.
All right. See how you get that
insurance policy?
It only cost me let's say the branching
factor is 10.
How much is that insurance policy cost
me?
10% of my computation
because I can do this calculation and
have a move in hand
here at the at level D minus one
for only 1/10 of
of the computation is required to figure
out what I would do if I go all the way
down to the Dth level.
Okay? Is that clear?
So this idea is extremely
important in its general form but we
haven't quite got there yet because
what if the branching factor turns out
to be really big and we can't get
through this level either?
What should we do to make sure that we
still have a good move?
Right. We can do it at the B minus two
level.
So that would be
up here
and at that level
the amount of computation would be B to
the D minus two.
So now it's
we've added 10% plus 10% of that.
And
our knee jerk is beginning to beginning
to form, right?
What are we going to do in the end to
make sure that no matter what we've got
a move?
We're going to What's that Christopher?
Start from the very first level. Start
from the very first level and give
ourselves an insurance policy for every
level we try to calculate.
But that might be real costly.
So we better figure out if this is going
to be too big of an expense to bear.
So let's see if we do what Christopher
suggests,
then the amount of computation we need
in our insurance policy
is going to be equal to
one. We're going to do it up here at
this level too even though we don't need
it. Just make everything work out easy.
One plus B.
That's getting our insurance policy down
here at this first level.
And we're going to add B squared
all the way down to B
to the D minus one.
So that's how much we're going to expend
getting an insurance policy at every
level.
How much is the sum of that?
High school algebra, right?
Let's let's just do it for fun.
Oh,
unfortunate choice of variable names. BS
is equal to
Well, we're going to multiply all those
by B.
Okay?
Now we'll subtract the first one from
the second one.
Which tells us that the amount of
calculation needed for our insurance
policy is equal to B to the D
minus one
over B
minus one.
Is that a big number?
We can do a little algebra on that and
say that
B to the D is a huge number, so that - 1
doesn't count.
And B is probably 10 to 15, so B - 1 is
essentially equal to B.
So that's approximately equal to
B to the D - 1.
So with a with an approximation factored
in, the amount it takes us to
amount of computation needed to do an
insurance policy at every level
is not much different from the amount of
computation needed to get an insurance
policy at just one level, the the
penultimate one.
So this idea is called progressive
deepening.
And now we can visit our goal star list
goal star ideal list and see how these
things match up with that.
First of all, the the dead horse
principle comes up to the fore when we
talk about alpha-beta because we know
with alpha-beta that we can get rid of a
whole lot of the tree and not do static
evaluation, not even do move generation.
That's the dead horse we don't want to
beat. There's no point in doing that
calculation cuz it can't figure into the
answer.
The
development of the progressive deepening
idea
I like to think of it as in terms of the
martial arts principle we're using the
enemy's characteristics against them.
Because of this exponential blow up,
we have exactly the right
characteristics to have a move available
at every level as an insurance policy
against not being through the next
level.
And finally,
this whole idea of progressive deepening
can be viewed as a prime example of what
we like to call anytime algorithms that
always have an answer ready to go as
soon as an answer is demanded.
So as soon as that clock runs out at 2
minutes,
some answer is available. It'll be the
best one that the system can compute in
the time available given the
characteristics of the game tree as it's
developed so far.
So there are other kinds of anytime
algorithms. This is an example of one.
So that's how
all game playing programs work.
Minimax plus alpha-beta plus progressive
deepening.
Christopher is
alpha-beta a alternative to minimax? No.
No, it's not.
It's something you layer on top of
minimax. Does alpha-beta give you a
different answer
from minimax?
No.
No, it doesn't. Let's hear see everybody
shake their head one way or the other.
It does not give you an answer different
from minimax. That's right. It gives you
exactly the same answer, not a different
answer. It's a speed up.
It's not an approximation. It's a speed
up. It cuts off lots of the tree.
Dead horse principle at work, okay? You
got a question, Christopher? Yeah, um
along the lines of the progressively
computing the best result, is it
possible to
almost keep a temporary value for the
values computed on each node of the tree
and then keep and then an instant value
Oh, an excellent suggestion. In fact,
Christopher has just
I think, if I can jump ahead a couple
steps, I think Christopher has
reinvented a very important idea.
Progressive deepening
not only ensures that you get a better
answer,
progressive deepening not only ensures
you have an answer at any time, it
actually improves the performance of
alpha-beta when you layer alpha-beta on
top of it.
Because these values that are calculated
at intermediate parts of the tree
are used to reorder the nodes under the
tree so as to give you maximum
alpha-beta cutoff.
I think that's what you said,
Christopher. But if it isn't, we'll talk
about your idea after class. Sure.
So this is what every game playing
program does.
So what how is Deep Deep Blue different?
Not much.
So Deep Blue as of 1997
did about 200 million static evaluations
per second.
And it went down
using alpha-beta, went down about 14,
15, 16 levels.
So Deep Blue
was minimax
plus alpha-beta
plus progressive deepening
plus a whole lot of parallel computing
plus
an opening book
special purpose stuff for the end game
plus perhaps the most important thing,
uneven tree development.
So far we've pretended the tree always
goes out in an even way to a fixed
level.
But there's no particular reason why
that has to be so.
Some
some situation down at the bottom of the
tree
may be particularly dynamic.
In the very next move you might be able
to capture the opponent's queen.
So in circumstances like that you want
to blow out a little extra search.
So eventually you get to the idea that
there's no particular reason to have
the search go down to a fixed
level,
but instead you can develop the tree in
a way that gives you the most confidence
that your backed up numbers are correct.
And so that's the most important of the
extra flourishes added by Deep Blue
when it beat Kasparov in 1997.
And now we can uh come back and say,
"Well, you understand Deep Blue, but is
this a model of anything that goes on in
our own heads?"
Is this a model of any kind of
human intelligence or is it a different
kind of intelligence?
And the answer is mixed, right? Because
we are often in situations where we're
playing a game.
We're competing with another
manufacturer. We have to think what the
other manufacturer will do in response
to what we do and
down several levels.
On the other hand,
uh is going down 14 levels what human
chess players do when they win the world
championship?
Mm,
doesn't seem even to them like that's
even a remote possibility.
Uh they have to do something different
because they don't have that kind of
computational horsepower.
This is doing computation
in the same way that a bulldozer
processes gravel.
It's substituting raw power for
sophistication.
So when a human chess master plays the
game,
they have a great deal of chess
knowledge in their head and they
recognize patterns.
There are famous experiments, by the
way, that demonstrate this in the
following way.
Show
a chessboard to a chess master and ask
them to memorize it.
They're very good at that as long as
it's a legitimate chessboard. If the
pieces are placed random randomly,
they're no good at it at all.
So it's very clear that they've
developed a repertoire of chess
knowledge that makes it possible for
them to recognize situations and play
the game much more like number one up
there.
So Deep Blue
is manifesting some kind of
intelligence, but it's not our
intelligence. It's bulldozer
intelligence.
So it's important to understand that
kind of intelligence, too,
but it's not necessarily the same kind
of intelligence that we have in our own
head.
So that concludes what we're going to do
today, and as you know, on Wednesday we
have a celebration of learning,
uh which is familiar to you if you take
it 3091,
and therefore I will see you on
Wednesday.
All of you, I imagine.